Ireland

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Coordinates: 53° N 07° W

This article is about the island. For the state, see Republic of Ireland. For
other uses, see Ireland (disambiguation).

                            Ireland
                             Éire
                            Airlann
Northwest of continental Europe with Great Britain to the east.
Northwest of continental Europe with Great Britain to the east.
                           Geography
Location            Western Europe
Area                84,412 km² (32,591 sq mi)
Highest point       Carrauntoohil 1,038 m (3,406 ft)
                        Administration
                    Flag of Ireland Ireland
Largest city        Dublin
           Flag of the United Kingdom United Kingdom
Constituent part    Northern Ireland
Largest city        Belfast
                         Demographics
Population          approximately 6 million (as of 2007)
Indigenous people   Irish

Ireland (Irish: Éire; Ulster Scots: Airlann) is the third largest island in
Europe,^[1] and the twentieth-largest island in the world.^[2] It lies to the
north-west of continental Europe and is surrounded by hundreds of islands and
islets. To the east of Ireland, separated by the Irish Sea, is the island of
Great Britain. Politically, the state Ireland (described as the Republic of
Ireland in cases of ambiguity) covers five-sixths of the island, with Northern
Ireland (NI), part of the United Kingdom, covering the remainder in the
north-east.

The population of the island is slightly over six million (2007), with 4.34
million in the Republic^[3] (1.7 million in Greater Dublin^[4]) and an
estimated 1.75 million in Northern Ireland^[5] (0.6 million in Greater Belfast^
[6]). This is a significant increase from a modern historical low in the 1960s,
but still much lower than the peak population of over 8 million in the early
19th century, prior to the Irish potato famine.

The name Ireland derives from the name Ériu (in modern Irish, Éire) with the
addition of the Germanic word land. Most other western European names for
Ireland derive from the same source, such as French Irlande, Spanish, Italian
and Portuguese Irlanda, German Irland and the Dutch Ierland.

Contents

  • 1 Political geography
  • 2 All-island institutions
  • 3 Physical geography
      □ 3.1 Climate
      □ 3.2 Geology
  • 4 Wildlife
      □ 4.1 Fauna
      □ 4.2 Flora
          ☆ 4.2.1 The impact of agriculture
  • 5 History
  • 6 History since partition
      □ 6.1 Irish Independence: The Irish Free State, Éire, Ireland
      □ 6.2 Northern Ireland
  • 7 Science
  • 8 Culture
      □ 8.1 Literature and the arts
      □ 8.2 Music and dance
  • 9 Sport
  • 10 Places of interest
  • 11 Modern architecture
  • 12 Demographics
  • 13 Transport
      □ 13.1 Air
      □ 13.2 Rail
      □ 13.3 Roads
  • 14 Energy network
  • 15 Economy
  • 16 Gallery of images
  • 17 See also
  • 18 Notes
  • 19 References
  • 20 Further reading
      □ 20.1 Wildlife
  • 21 External links

[edit] Political geography

Map of Ireland showing the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland.
●
Map of Ireland showing the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland.

The island of Ireland has two distinct jurisdictions:

  • Ireland ( political description is the Republic of Ireland)^[7]. a
    sovereign state, covers five-sixths of the island. Its capital is Dublin.
  • Northern Ireland, part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
    Ireland, covers the remaining sixth. Its capital is Belfast.

For the political history of the island, see History of Ireland.

    Province      Population  Area   Largest
                              (km²)    city
Flag of Connacht  503,083    17,713  Galway
Connacht
Flag of Leinster  2,292,939  19,774  Dublin
Leinster
Flag of Munster   1,172,170  24,608  Cork
Munster
Flag of Ulster    1,993,918^ 24,481  Belfast
Ulster            [8]

Traditionally, Ireland is subdivided into four provinces: Connacht, Leinster,
Munster and Ulster; and, in a system developed between the 13th and 18th
centuries, 32 counties. Twenty-six of the counties are in the Republic of
Ireland, and the remaining six (all in Ulster) are in Northern Ireland.
Notably, based on boundaries established in the Early Modern period, Ulster and
Northern Ireland are neither synonymous nor co-extensive, as three counties of
Ulster (Cavan, Donegal and Monaghan) are part of the Republic. Nonetheless,
'Ulster' is often used colloquially as a synonym for Northern Ireland. Counties
Dublin, Cork, Limerick, Galway, Waterford and Tipperary have been broken up
into smaller administrative areas, but are still considered by Ordnance Survey
Ireland to be official counties. The counties in Northern Ireland are no longer
used for local government, although their traditional boundaries are still used
in sports and in some other cultural and ceremonial areas.

[edit] All-island institutions

The rugby union flag of Ireland.
●
The rugby union flag of Ireland.

Despite the constitutional division of Ireland, the island does operate as a
single entity in a number of areas. With a few notable exceptions, the island
operates as a single unit in all major religious denominations and in many
economic fields despite using two different currencies. There are also
significant all-island dimensions to sports such as rugby and hockey.


For example most of the popular sports on the island operate on an all-Ireland
basis, such as Gaelic games, rugby union and golf. The notable exception to
this is Association Football, although an all-Ireland club cup competition, the
Setanta Cup, was created in 2005. The creation of an all-island Association
Football league and a single international team (which is the case for rugby
union) has been publicly touted by various prominent figures on the island in
recent years, such as Irish government minister Dermot Ahern^[9] More recently,
FAI chief executive John Delaney believes there will be an all-Ireland league,
but not before 2012 since a contract involving the Eircom League and the FAI
runs to 2011.^[10] There is currently at least one player from Northern Ireland
regularly appearing in the Republic of Ireland's squad, a practice that the
latter's governing institution and the Irish government claim is permitted by
the Belfast Agreement - although in reality there was apparently nothing to
prevent the FAI from selecting players from Northern Ireland before the
Agreement, since the Republic of Ireland's citizenship laws already extended
north of the border. Nonetheless, Northern Ireland's governing body, the IFA,
has raised the matter with the world governing body, FIFA, which appears to
have ruled in favour of the Republic (although the matter remains unclear and
therefore unresolved).

All major religious bodies are organised on an all-Ireland basis, such as the
Roman Catholic Church, the Methodist Church in Ireland, the Church of Ireland/
Anglican Church and the Presbyterian Church in Ireland. Some trades unions are
also organised on an all-island basis and associated with the Irish Congress of
Trades Unions (ICTU) in Dublin, while others in Northern Ireland are affiliated
with the Trades Union Congress (TUC) in the United Kingdom, and some affiliate
to both — although such unions may organise in both parts of the island as well
as in Great Britain. The Union of Students in Ireland (USI) organises jointly
in Northern Ireland with the National Union of Students of the United Kingdom
(NUS), under the name NUS-USI.

The Belfast Agreement provides for all-Ireland governance in various guises.
For example, a North-South Ministerial Council was established as a forum in
which ministers from the Irish Government and the Northern Ireland Assembly can
discuss matters of mutual concern and formulate all-Ireland policies in twelve
"areas of co-operation", such as agriculture, the environment and transport.
Six of these policy areas have been provided with implementation bodies, an
example of which is the Food Safety Promotion Board. Tourism marketing is also
managed on an all-Ireland basis, by Tourism Ireland.

Two political parties, Provisional Sinn Féin and the Irish Green Party, contest
elections and hold parliamentary seats in both jurisdictions. The largest party
in the Republic of Ireland, Fianna Fáil, considered extending its organisation
into Northern Ireland, perhaps via a merger with another political party, the
Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP).^[11]

Some newspapers on the island are circulated in both jurisdictions, e.g., the
Irish Times and report news on an all-Ireland basis. The Irish Times includes
news concerning Northern Ireland in its "Home" section, despite the fact that
it is based in the Republic. In general, though, most newspapers' circulation
is largely concentrated in one jurisdiction or the other. Furthermore, most of
the television stations based on the island broadcast across the whole island,
such as RTÉ, TG4 and UTV (although signals may be relatively weaker in more
remote areas).

An increasingly large amount of commercial activity operates on an all-Ireland
basis,^[12] a development that is in part facilitated by the two jurisdictions'
shared membership of the European Union. There have been calls for the creation
of an "all-island economy" from members of the business community and
policy-makers on both sides of the border, so as to benefit from economies of
scale and boost competitiveness in both jurisdictions.^[13] This is a stated
aim of the Irish Government and nationalist political parties in the Northern
Ireland Assembly.^[14] One commercial area in which the island already operates
largely as a single entity is the electricity market ^[15], and there are plans
for the creation of an all-island gas market ^[16].

17 March is celebrated throughout the island of Ireland as St. Patrick's Day.

[edit] Physical geography

True colour image of Ireland, captured by a NASA satellite on 4 January 2003,
with the Atlantic Ocean to the west and the Irish Sea to the east.
●
True colour image of Ireland, captured by a NASA satellite on 4 January 2003,
with the Atlantic Ocean to the west and the Irish Sea to the east.
Physical features of Ireland. See also this larger version.
●
Physical features of Ireland. See also this larger version.

    Main article: Geography of Ireland

A ring of coastal mountains surrounds low central plains. The highest peak is
Carrauntoohil (Irish: Corrán Tuathail) in County Kerry, which is 1,038 m
(3,406 ft).^[17] The River Shannon, at 386 km (240 miles) is the longest river
in Ireland.^[18] The island's lush vegetation, a product of its mild climate
and frequent but soft rainfall, earns it the sobriquet "Emerald Isle". The
island's area is 84,412 km²^[19] (32,591 square miles).

Ireland's least arable land lies in the south-western and western counties.
These areas are largely mountainous and rocky, with dramatic green vistas,
hence the attributive name "the Emerald Isle".

[edit] Climate

Overall, Ireland has a mild, but changeable, Oceanic climate with few extremes.
The warmest recorded air temperature was 33.3 °C (91.94 °F) at Kilkenny Castle,
County Kilkenny on 26 June 1887, where as the lowest recorded temperature was
−19.1 °C (−2.38 °F) at Markree Castle, County Sligo on 16 January 1881.^[20]

Other statistics show that the greatest recorded annual rainfall was 3,964.9 mm
(156.1 in) in the Ballaghbeena Gap in 1960. The driest year on record was 1887,
with only 356.6 mm (14.0 in) of rain recorded at Glasnevin, while the longest
period of absolute drought was in Limerick where there was no recorded rainfall
over 38 days during April and May of 1938.^[21]

The climate is typically insular, and as a result of the moderating moist winds
which ordinarily prevail from the South-Western Atlantic, it is temperate,
avoiding the extremes in temperature of many other global areas sharing similar
latitudes.

Precipitation falls throughout the year, but is light overall, particularly in
the east. The west, however, tends to be wetter on average and prone to the
full force of Atlantic storms, more especially in the late autumn and winter
months, which occasionally bring destructive winds and high rainfall totals to
these areas, as well as snow and hail. The regions of North Galway and East
Mayo have the highest incidents of recorded lightning annually (5 to 10 days
per year).^[22] Munster in the south records the least snow with Ulster in the
north more prone to snow. Some areas along the south and southwest coasts have
not had any lying snow since February 1991.

Inland areas are warmer in summer, and colder in winter - there are usually
around 40 days of below freezing temperatures (0 °C/32 °F) at inland weather
stations, but only 10 days at coastal stations. Ireland is sometimes affected
by heat waves, most recently 1995, 2003, 2006.

[edit] Geology

Irish countryside
●
Irish countryside

Geologically the island consists of a number of provinces - in the far west
around Galway and Donegal is a medium to high grade metamorphic and igneous
complex of Caledonide (Scottish Highland) affinity. Across southeast Ulster and
extending southwest to Longford and south to Navan is a province of Ordovician
and Silurian rocks with more affinities with the Southern Uplands province of
Scotland. Further south, there is an area along the Wexford coast of granite
intrusives into more Ordovician and Silurian rocks with a more Welsh affinity.

In the southwest, around Bantry Bay and the mountains of Macgillicuddy's Reeks,
is an area of substantially deformed but only lightly metamorphosed
Devonian-aged rocks.

This partial ring of "hard rock" geology is covered by a blanket of
Carboniferous limestone over the centre of the country, giving rise to the
comparatively fertile and famously "lush" landscape of the country. The west
coast district of The Burren around Lisdoonvarna has well developed karst
features. Elsewhere, significant stratiform lead-zinc mineralisation is found
in the limestones (around Silvermines and Tynagh).

Hydrocarbon exploration is continuing. The first major find was the Kinsale
Head gas field off Cork/Cobh by Marathon Oil in the mid-1970s. More recently,
in 1999, Enterprise Oil announced the discovery of the Corrib Gas Field. This
has increased activity off the west coast in parallel with the "West of
Shetland" step-out development from the North Sea hydrocarbon province.
Exploration continues, with a frontier well planned north of Donegal for August
2006 and continuing drilling of prospects in the Irish Sea and St Georges
Channel.

[edit] Wildlife

Ireland has fewer animal and plant species than either Britain or mainland
Europe because it became an island shortly after the end of the last Ice Age,
about 8,000 years ago. Many different habitat types are found in Ireland,
including farmland, open woodland, temperate broadleaf and mixed forests,
conifer plantations, peat bogs, and various coastal habitats.

[edit] Fauna

    Main article: Fauna of Ireland

Only 26 land mammal species are native to Ireland, because it was isolated from
Europe by rising sea levels after the Ice Age. Some species, such as the red
fox, hedgehog, and badger are very common, whereas others, like the Irish hare,
red deer and pine marten are less so. Aquatic wild-life - such as species of
turtle, shark, whale, dolphin, and others - are common off the coast. About 400
species of birds have been recorded in Ireland. Many of these are migratory,
including the swallow. Most of Ireland's bird species come from Iceland,
Greenland, Africa among other territories. There are no snakes in Ireland and
only one reptile (the common lizard) is native to the country. Extinct species
include the great Irish elk, the wolf, the great auk, and others. Some
previously extinct birds - such as the golden eagle - have recently been
reintroduced after decades of extirpation.

Agriculture drives current land use patterns in Ireland, leaving limited land
to preserve natural habitats,^[23] in particular for larger wild mammals with
greater territorial requirements. With no top predator in Ireland, populations
of animals that cannot be controlled by smaller predators (such as the fox) are
controlled by annual culling, i.e. semi-wild populations of deer.

[edit] Flora

    See also: List of the vascular plants of Britain and Ireland and Trees of
    Britain and Ireland

Until mediæval times Ireland was heavily forested with oak, pine, beech and
birch. Forests now cover about 9% (4,450 km² or one million acres), of the
land.^[24] Because of its mild climate, many species, (including sub-tropical
ones like palm trees (Arecaceae)) are grown in Ireland. Much of the land is now
covered with pasture, and there are many species of wild-flower. Gorse (Ulex
europaeus), a wild furze, is commonly found growing in the uplands, and ferns
are plentiful in the more moist regions, especially in the western parts of
Ireland. It is home to hundreds of plant species, some of them unique to the
island. The country has been "invaded" by some grasses, such as Spartina
anglica.^[25]

The algal and seaweed flora is that of the cold-temperate. The total number of
species is:- Rhodophyta: 264; Heterokontophyta: 152; Chloropyta: 114;
Cyanophyta: 31 giving a total of 574. Rarer species include: Itonoa marginifera
(J.Ag. - Masuda and Guiry); Schmitzia hiscockiana (Maggs and Guiry); Gelidiella
calcicola (Maggs and Guiry); Gelidium maggsiae (Rico and Guiry) and Halymenia
latifolia (P.Crouan and H.Crouan ex Kützing).^[26] The country has been invaded
by some algae, some of which are now well established: Asparagopsis armara -
first recorded by de Valera in 1939; Colpomenia peregrina - now locally
abundant and first recorded in the 1930s; Sargassum muticum (Yendo/Fensholt) -
now well established in Strangford Lough; Codium fragile ssp. atlanticum and
Codium fragile ssp. tomentosum - both now well established.^[27]

[edit] The impact of agriculture

The long history of agricultural production coupled with modern intensive
agricultural methods (such as pesticide and fertiliser use) has placed pressure
on biodiversity in Ireland. "Runoff" of contaminants into streams, rivers and
lakes impact the natural fresh-water ecosystems. A land of green fields for
crop cultivation and cattle rearing limits the space available for the
establishment of native wild species. Hedgerows however, traditionally used for
maintaining and demarcating land boundaries, act as a refuge for native wild
flora. Their ecosystems stretch across the countryside and act as a network of
connections to preserve remnants of the ecosystem that once covered the island.
Subsidies under the Common Agricultural Policy which supported these
agricultural practices are undergoing reforms.^[28] The CAP still subsidises
some potentially destructive agricultural practices, however, the recent
reforms have gradually decoupled subsidies from production levels and
introduced environmental and other requirements.^[28]

Forest covers about 10% of the country, with most designated for commercial
production.^[29] Forested areas typically consist of monoculture plantations of
non-native species which may result in habitats that are not suitable for
supporting a broad range of native species of invertebrates. Remnants of native
forest can be found scattered around the country, in particular in the
Killarney National Park. Natural areas require fencing to prevent over-grazing
by deer and sheep that roam over uncultivated areas. This is one of the main
factors preventing the natural regeneration of forests across many regions of
the country.^[30]

[edit] History

    Main article: History of Ireland

      History of Ireland
            series

Early history

Early Christian Ireland

Early medieval and Viking era

Norman Ireland

Early Modern Ireland 1536–1691

Ireland 1691–1801

Ireland 1801–1922

History of the Republic

History of Northern Ireland

Economic history

This box: view • talk • edit

Stone age passage tombs at Carrowmore, County Sligo
●
Stone age passage tombs at Carrowmore, County Sligo

A long cold climatic spell prevailed until about 9,000 years ago, and most of
Ireland was covered with ice. This era was known as the Ice Age. Sea-levels
were lower then, and Ireland, as with its neighbour Britain, instead of being
islands, were part of a greater continental Europe. Mesolithic stone age
inhabitants arrived some time after 8000 BC. Agriculture arrived with the
Neolithic circa 4000 to 4500 BC where sheep, goats, cattle and cereals were
imported from southwest continental Europe. At the Céide Fields in County Mayo,
an extensive Neolithic field system - arguably the oldest in the world - has
been preserved beneath a blanket of peat. Consisting of small fields separated
from one another by dry-stone walls, the Céide Fields were farmed for several
centuries between 3500 and 3000 BC. Wheat and barley were the principal crops
cultivated.^[31]

The Bronze Age, which began around 2500 BC, saw the production of elaborate
gold as well as bronze ornaments, weapons and tools. The Iron Age in Ireland
was supposedly associated with people known as Celts. They are traditionally
thought to have colonised Ireland in a series of waves between the 8th and 1st
centuries BC, with the Gaels, the last wave of Celts, conquering the island and
dividing it into five or more kingdoms. Many scientists and academic scholars
now favour a view that emphasises cultural diffusion from overseas over
significant colonisation such as what Clonycavan Man was reported to be.^[32]^
[33]^[34] The Romans referred to Ireland as Hibernia^[35] and/or Scotia.^[36]
Ptolemy in AD 100 records Ireland's geography and tribes.^[37] Native accounts
are confined to Irish poetry, myth, and archaeology. The exact relationship
between Rome and the tribes of Hibernia is unclear; the only references are a
few Roman writings.

In medieval times, a monarch (also known as the High King) presided over the
(then five) provinces of Ireland. These provinces too had their own kings, who
were at least nominally subject to the monarch, who resided at Tara. The
written judicial system was the Brehon Law, and it was administered by
professional learned jurists who were known as the Brehons.

According to early medieval chronicles, in 431, Bishop Palladius arrived in
Ireland on a mission from Pope Celestine I to minister to the Irish "already
believing in Christ." (This was to convert the Celtic Church to Roman
Catholicism). The same chronicles record that Saint Patrick, Ireland's patron
saint, arrived in 432. There is continued debate over the missions of Palladius
and Patrick, but the general consensus is that they both existed and that 7th
century annalists may have mis-attributed some of their activities to each
other. Palladius most likely went to Leinster, while Patrick is believed to
have gone to Ulster, where he probably spent time in captivity as a young man.

The druid tradition collapsed in the face of the spread of the new religion.
Irish Christian scholars excelled in the study of Latin and Greek learning and
Christian theology in the monasteries that flourished, preserving Latin and
Greek learning during the Early Middle Ages. The arts of manuscript
illumination, metalworking, and sculpture flourished and produced such
treasures as the Book of Kells, ornate jewellery, and the many carved stone
crosses that dot the island. From the 9th century, waves of Viking raiders
plundered monasteries and towns, adding to a pattern of endemic raiding and
warfare. Eventually Vikings settled in Ireland, and established many towns,
including the modern day cities of Dublin, Cork, Limerick and Waterford.

Aughnanure, the main castle of O'Flaherty
●
Aughnanure, the main castle of O'Flaherty

From 1169, Ireland was entered by Cambro-Norman warlords, led by Richard de
Clare, 2nd Earl of Pembroke (Strongbow), on an invitation from the then King of
Leinster. In 1171, King Henry II of England came to Ireland, using the 1155
Bull Laudabiliter issued to him by then Pope Adrian IV, to claim sovereignty
over the island, and forced the Cambro-Norman warlords and some of the Gaelic
Irish kings to accept him as their overlord. From the 13th century, English law
began to be introduced. By the late thirteenth century the Norman-Irish had
established the feudal system throughout most of lowland Ireland. Their
settlement was characterised by the establishment of baronies, manors, towns
and large land-owning monastic communities, and the county system. The towns of
Dublin, Cork, Wexford, Waterford, Limerick, Galway, New Ross, Kilkenny,
Carlingford, Drogheda, Sligo, Athenry, Arklow, Buttevant, Carlow,
Carrick-on-Suir, Cashel, Clonmel, Dundalk, Enniscorthy, Kildare, Kinsale,
Mullingar, Naas, Navan, Nenagh, Thurles, Wicklow, Trim and Youghal were all
under Norman-Irish control.

In the 14th century the English settlement went into a period of decline and
large areas, for example Sligo, were re-occupied by Gaelic septs. The medieval
English presence in Ireland was deeply shaken by Black Death, which arrived in
Ireland in 1348. From the late 15th century English rule was once again
expanded, first through the efforts of the Earls of Kildare and Ormond then
through the activities of the Tudor State under Henry VIII and Mary and
Elizabeth. This resulted in the complete conquest of Ireland by 1603 and the
final collapse of the Gaelic social and political superstructure at the end of
the 17th century, as a result of English and Scottish Protestant colonisation
in the Plantations of Ireland, and the disastrous Wars of the Three Kingdoms
and the Williamite War in Ireland. Approximately 600,000 people, nearly half
the Irish population, died during the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland.^[38]

Hanging of suspected United Irishmen.
●
Hanging of suspected United Irishmen.

After the Irish Rebellion of 1641, Irish Catholics and nonconforming
Protestants were barred from voting or attending the Irish Parliament. The new
English Protestant ruling class was known as the Protestant Ascendancy. Towards
the end of the 18th century the entirely Anglican Irish Parliament attained a
greater degree of independence from the British Parliament than it had
previously held. Under the penal laws no Irish Catholic could sit in the
Parliament of Ireland, even though some 90% of Ireland's population was native
Irish Catholic when the first of these bans was introduced in 1691. This ban
was followed by others in 1703 and 1709 as part of a comprehensive system
disadvantaging the Catholic community, and to a lesser extent Protestant
dissenters.^[39] In 1798, many members of this dissenter tradition made common
cause with Catholics in a rebellion inspired and led by the Society of United
Irishmen. It was staged with the aim of creating a fully independent Ireland as
a state with a republican constitution. Despite assistance from France the
Irish Rebellion of 1798 was put down by British forces.

In 1800, the British and subsequently the unrepresentative Irish Parliament
passed the Act of Union which, in 1801, merged the Kingdom of Ireland and the
Kingdom of Great Britain to create the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland. The passage of the Act in the Irish Parliament was achieved with
substantial majorities, in part (according to contemporary documents) through
bribery, namely the awarding of peerages and honours to critics to get their
votes.^[40] Thus, Ireland became part of an extended United Kingdom, ruled
directly by the UK Parliament in London. The 19th century saw the Great Famine
of the 1840s, during which one million Irish people died and over a million
emigrated. By the 1840s as a result of the famine fully half of all immigrants
to the United States originated from Ireland. A total of 35 million Americans
(12% of total population) reported Irish ancestry in the 2005 American
Community Survey.^[41] Mass emigration became entrenched as a result of the
famine and the population continued to decline until late in the 20th century.
The pre-famine peak was over 8 million recorded in the 1841 census. The
population has never returned to this level.^[42]

The 19th and early 20th century saw the rise of Irish nationalism among the
Roman Catholic population. Daniel O'Connell led a successful unarmed campaign
for Catholic Emancipation. A subsequent campaign for repeal of the Act of Union
failed. Later in the century Charles Stewart Parnell and others campaigned for
self-government within the Union or "home rule". Protestants, largely
concentrated in Ulster, who considered themselves to be British as well as
Irish, were strongly opposed to home rule, under which they would be dominated
by Catholic and Southern interests. To prevent home rule the Ulster Volunteers
were formed in 1913 under the leadership of Lord Carson, and to impose home
rule the Irish Volunteers were formed in the South in 1914 under John Redmond.
An armed rebellion took place with the Easter Rising of 1916, and subsequently
Irish War of Independence in 1919. In 1921, a treaty was concluded between the
British Government and the leaders of the Irish Republic. The Treaty recognised
the two-state solution created in the Government of Ireland Act 1920. Northern
Ireland was presumed to form a home rule state within the new Irish Free State
unless it opted out. Northern Ireland had a majority Protestant population and
opted out as expected, choosing to remain part of the United Kingdom,
incorporating, however, within its border a significant Catholic and
nationalist minority. A Boundary Commission was set up to decide on the
boundaries between the two Irish states, though it was subsequently abandoned
after it recommended only minor adjustments to the border. Disagreements over
some provisions of the treaty led to a split in the nationalist movement and
subsequently to the Civil War. The Civil War ended in 1923 with the defeat of
the anti-treaty forces.

[edit] History since partition

[edit] Irish Independence: The Irish Free State, Éire, Ireland

    Main article: History of the Republic of Ireland

Republic of Ireland flag.
●
Republic of Ireland flag.

The Anglo-Irish Treaty was ratified by the Dáil in January 1922 by a vote of 64
- 57. The minority refused to accept the result and this resulted in the Irish
Civil War, which lasted until 1923. On 6th December 1922, in the middle of the
Civil War, the Irish Free State came into being. During its early years the new
state was governed by the victors of the Civil War. However, in the 1930s
Fianna Fáil, the party of the opponents of the treaty, was elected into
government. The party proposed, and the electorate accepted in a referendum in
1937, a new constitution which renamed the state "Éire or in the English
language, Ireland" (article 4 of the Constitution).

The state was neutral during World War II, which was known internally as The
Emergency. It offered some assistance to the Allies, especially in Northern
Ireland. It is estimated^[43] that around 50,000 volunteers from Éire/Ireland
joined the British armed forces during the Second World War. In 1949, Ireland
declared itself to be a republic.

Ireland experienced large-scale emigration in the 1950s and again in the 1980s.

From 1987 the economy recovered and the 1990s saw the beginning of
unprecedented economic success, in a phenomenon known as the "Celtic Tiger". By
2007 it had become the fifth richest country (in terms of GDP per capita) in
the world, and the second richest in the European Union, moving from being a
net recipient of the budget to becoming a net contributor during the next
Budget round (2007-13), and from a country of net emigration to one of net
immigration. In October 2006, there were talks between Ireland and the U.S. to
negotiate a new immigration policy between the two countries, in response to
the growth of the Irish economy and desire of many U.S. citizens who sought to
move to Ireland for work.^[44]

[edit] Northern Ireland

The Ulster Banner, used as the flag of the former Government of Northern
Ireland 1953 - 1972, now unofficially used by some sporting organisations to
represent the area, some unionist-controlled local authorities and loyalists.
●
The Ulster Banner, used as the flag of the former Government of Northern
Ireland 1953 - 1972, now unofficially used by some sporting organisations to
represent the area, some unionist-controlled local authorities and loyalists.
Parliament Buildings, seat of the present Northern Ireland Assembly.
●
Parliament Buildings, seat of the present Northern Ireland Assembly.

    Main article: History of Northern Ireland

Northern Ireland was created as an administrative division of the United
Kingdom by the Government of Ireland Act 1920. From 1921 until 1972, Northern
Ireland enjoyed limited self-government within the United Kingdom, with its own
parliament and prime minister.

In the first half of the 20th century, Northern Ireland was largely spared the
strife of the Civil War, but there were sporadic episodes of inter-communal
violence between nationalists and unionists during the decades that followed
partition. Although the Irish Free State was neutral during World War II,
Northern Ireland as part of the United Kingdom was not, and became involved in
the British war effort (albeit without military conscription as it was
introduced in Great Britain). Belfast suffered a bombing raid from the German
Luftwaffe in 1941.

In elections to the 1921-1972 regional government, the Protestant and Catholic
communities in Northern Ireland each voted largely along sectarian lines,
meaning that the Government of Northern Ireland (elected by "first past the
post" from 1929) was controlled by the Ulster Unionist Party. Over time, the
minority Catholic community felt increasingly alienated by the regional
government, with further disaffection fuelled by practices such as
gerrymandering of the local council in Londonderry, and alleged discrimination
against Catholics in housing and employment.^[45]

In the late 1960s nationalist grievances were aired publicly in mass civil
rights protests, which were often confronted by loyalist counter-protests. The
Government's reaction to confrontations was seen to be one-sided and
heavy-handed, and law and order broke down as unrest and inter-communal
violence increased. In August 1969, the regional government requested that the
Army be deployed to aid the police, who were exhausted after several nights of
serious rioting. In 1970, the paramilitary Provisional IRA, which favoured the
creation of a united Ireland, was formed and began a campaign against what it
called the "British occupation of the six counties". Other groups, on both the
unionist side and the nationalist side, participated in the violence and the
period known as the "Troubles" began, resulting in over 3600^[46] deaths over
the subsequent three decades. Owing to the civil unrest during "The Troubles",
the British government suspended home rule in 1972 and imposed "direct rule"
from Westminster.

There were several (ultimately unsuccessful) political attempts to end "The
Troubles"; such as the Sunningdale Agreement of 1973 and Anglo-Irish Agreement
of 1985. In 1998, following a Provisional IRA cease fire and multi-party talks,
the Belfast Agreement was concluded and ratified by referendum. This agreement
attempted to restore self-government to Northern Ireland on the basis of
power-sharing between the two communities. Violence decreased greatly after the
signing of the accord, and on 28 July 2005, the Provisional IRA announced the
end of its armed campaign and the international weapons inspectors supervised
what they currently regard as the full decommissioning of the Provisional IRA's
weapons.^[47] The power-sharing assembly was suspended several times but
restored from 8 May 2007.

From 2 August 2007, Britain officially ended its military support of the police
in Northern Ireland, and began withdrawing troops. (In 1972, British troops
numbered more than 25,000 in Northern Ireland. After the withdrawal, a garrison
of approximately 5,000 is all that remains.)

[edit] Science

Ireland has a proportionately rich history in science and is known for its
excellence in scientific research conducted at its many universities and
institutions. Noted particularly is Ireland's contributions to fiber optics
technology and related technologies.

Founder of modern chemistry Robert Boyle was an Anglo-Irish natural
philosopher, chemist, physicist, inventor and early gentleman scientist, noted
for his work in physics and chemistry. He is best known for the formulation of
Boyle's law.

Other notable Irish Physicists include Ernest Walton (famous as winner of the
1951 Nobel Prize in Physics with Sir John Douglas Cockcroft for splitting the
nucleus of the atom by artificial means and contributions in the development of
a new theory of wave equation), George Johnstone Stoney (famous for introducing
the term electron in 1874 and as the uncle of the physicist George FitzGerald
and distant relative of mathematician Alan Turing), Joseph Larmor (who
predicted the phenomenon of time dilation [for orbiting electrons] and
published a paper describing FitzGerald-Lorentz contraction some two years
before Hendrik Lorentz and some eight years before Albert Einstein), John
Stewart Bell (famous as the originator of Bell's Theorem and his paper
concerning the discovery of the Bell-Jackiw-Adler anomaly - Bell was nominated
for a Nobel prize), George Francis FitzGerald, sir George Gabriel Stokes and
many others.

Notable mathematicians include Sir William Rowan Hamilton (mathematician,
physicist, astronomer and discoverer of quaternions), Francis Ysidro Edgeworth
(influential in the development of neo-classical economics, including the
Edgeworth box), John B. Cosgrave (specialist in number theory, former head of
the mathematics department of St. Patrick's College and discoverer of a new
2000-digit prime number in 1999 and a record composite Fermat number in 2003)
and John Lighton Synge (who made progress in different fields of science,
including mechanics and geometrical methods in general relativity and who had
mathematician John Nash as one of his students).

The Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies (DIAS) was established in 1940 by the
Taoiseach Éamon de Valera. In 1940, physicist Erwin Schrödinger received an
invitation to help establish the Institute. He became the Director of the
School for Theoretical Physics and remained there for 17 years, during which
time he became a naturalized Irish citizen.

[edit] Culture

    Main articles: Culture of Ireland and Irish people

           Arts in Ireland
The Book of Kells.
●
The Book of Kells.
Newgrange —5000 year old burial site.
●
Newgrange —5000 year old burial site.

[edit] Literature and the arts

    Main articles: Irish literature and Irish art

For an island of relatively small population, Ireland has made a
disproportionately large contribution to world literature in all its branches,
mainly in English. Poetry in Irish represents the oldest vernacular poetry in
Europe with the earliest examples dating from the 6th century; Jonathan Swift,
still often called the foremost satirist in the English language, was wildly
popular in his day (Gulliver's Travels, A Modest Proposal etc.) and remains so
in modern times amongst both children and adults. In more recent times, Ireland
has produced four winners of the Nobel Prize for Literature: George Bernard
Shaw, William Butler Yeats, Samuel Beckett and Seamus Heaney. Although not a
Nobel Prize winner, James Joyce is widely considered one of the most
significant writers of the 20th century and Samuel Beckett memorably refused to
attend his own Nobel award ceremony, claiming that Joyce should have received
the award. His 1922 novel Ulysses is considered one of the most important works
of Modernist literature and his life is celebrated annually on June 16 in
Dublin as the Bloomsday celebrations.^[48]

The early history of Irish visual art is generally considered to begin with
early carvings found at sites such as Newgrange and is traced through Bronze
age artifacts, particularly ornamental gold objects, and the religious carvings
and illuminated manuscripts of the mediæval period. During the course of the
19th and 20th centuries, a strong indigenous tradition of painting emerged,
including such figures as John Butler Yeats, William Orpen, Jack Yeats and
Louis le Brocquy.

Modern Irish literature is still often connected with its rural heritage, in
writers like John McGahern, and poets like Seamus Heaney. There is a thriving
performing arts culture in many Irish centres, most particularly in Galway.

[edit] Music and dance

    Main article: Music of Ireland

The Irish tradition of folk music and dance is also widely known. In the middle
years of the 20th century, as Irish society was attempting to modernise,
traditional music tended to fall out of favour, especially in urban areas.
During the 1960s, and inspired by the American folk music movement, there was a
revival of interest in the Irish tradition. This revival was led by such groups
as The Dubliners, The Chieftains, The Wolfe Tones, the Clancy Brothers,
Sweeney's Men, and individuals like Seán Ó Riada and Christy Moore. Irish and
Scottish traditional music share some similar characteristics.

Before too long, groups and musicians including Horslips, Van Morrison, and
Thin Lizzy were incorporating elements of traditional music into a rock idiom
to form a unique new sound. During the 1970s and 1980s, the distinction between
traditional and rock musicians became blurred, with many individuals regularly
crossing over between these styles of playing as a matter of course. This trend
can be seen more recently in the work of artists like U2, Enya, Flogging Molly,
Moya Brennan, The Saw Doctors, Bell X1, Damien Rice, The Corrs, Aslan, Sinéad
O'Connor, Clannad, The Cranberries, Rory Gallagher, Westlife, B*witched,
BoyZone, Gilbert O'Sullivan, Black 47, VNV Nation, Wolfe Tones, Ash, The
Thrills, Stars of Heaven, Something Happens, A House, Sharon Shannon, Damien
Dempsey, Declan O' Rourke, The Frames and The Pogues.

There is a growing genre of Irish music fused with heavy heavy metal called
Celtic Metal / Celtic Battle Metal (also sometimes called Folk Metal). Geasa,
Primordial, Waylander, and Cruachan are examples of bands who perform this
style of music.

Irish music has shown an immense inflation of popularity with many attempting
to return to their roots. Some contemporary music groups stick closer to a
"traditional" sound, including Altan, Teada, Danú, Dervish, Lúnasa, and Solas.
Others incorporate multiple cultures in a fusion of styles, such as Afro Celt
Sound System and Kíla.

Ireland has done well in the Eurovision Song Contest, being the most successful
country in the competition, with seven wins in 1970 with Dana, 1980 and 1987
with Johnny Logan, 1992 with Linda Martin, 1993 with Niamh Kavanagh, 1994 with
Paul Harrington and Charlie McGettigan and in 1996 with Eimear Quinn. ^[49]

[edit] Sport

    Main article: Sport in Ireland

A hurling match between Wexford and Kilkenny in Croke Park.
●
A hurling match between Wexford and Kilkenny in Croke Park.

The most popular sports in Ireland are Gaelic Football and Association Football
. Together with Hurling and Rugby, they make up the four biggest team sports in
Ireland. Gaelic Football is the most popular in terms of match attendance and
community involvement ^[50], and the All-Ireland Football Final is the biggest
day in Ireland's sporting calendar. Association football, meanwhile, is the
most commonly played team sport in Ireland and the most popular sport in which
Ireland fields international teams[1]Furthermore, there is a large measure of
Irish interest in the English and (to a lesser extent) Scottish soccer leagues.
Many other sports are also played and followed, particularly golf and horse
racing but also show jumping, greyhound racing, swimming, boxing, basketball,
cricket, fishing, handball, motorsport, tennis and hockey.

Hurling and Gaelic football, along with camogie, ladies' Gaelic football,
handball and rounders, make up the national sports of Ireland, collectively
known as Gaelic games. All Gaelic games are governed by the Gaelic Athletic
Association (GAA), with the exception of ladies' Gaelic football, which is
governed by a separate organisation. The GAA is organised on an all-Ireland
basis with all 32 counties competing. The headquarters of the GAA (and the main
stadium) is located at the 82,500^[51] capacity Croke Park in north Dublin.
Major GAA games are played there, including the semi-finals and finals of the
All-Ireland Senior Football Championship and All-Ireland Senior Hurling
Championship. During the redevelopment of the Lansdowne Road stadium,
international rugby and soccer are also being played there. All GAA players,
even at the highest level, are amateurs, receiving no wages (although they are
allowed to receive a certain amount of income from sources such as sponsorship,
grants or scholarships).

The Irish Football Association (IFA) was originally the governing body for
Association football throughout the island. The game has been played in Ireland
since the 1860s (Cliftonville F.C. of Belfast being Ireland's oldest club, but
remained a minority sport outside of Ulster until the 1880s. However, some
clubs based outside Belfast felt that the IFA largely favoured Ulster-based,
Protestant clubs in such matters as selection for the national team. Following
an incident in which, despite an earlier promise, the IFA, for security
reasons, moved an Irish Cup final replay from Dublin to Belfast, the clubs
based in what would soon become the Free State set up a new Football
Association of the Irish Free State (FAIFS) - now known as the Football
Association of Ireland (FAI) - in 1921.

Despite being initially blacklisted by the Home Nations' associations, the FAI
was recognised by FIFA in 1923 and organised its first international fixture in
1926 (against Italy. However, both the IFA and FAI continued to select their
teams from the whole of Ireland, with some players earning international caps
for matches with both teams. Both also referred to their respective teams as
"Ireland". In 1950, FIFA directed the associations only to select players from
within their respective territories, and in 1953 FIFA further clarified that
the FAI's team was to be known only as "Republic of Ireland", and the IFA's
team only as "Northern Ireland" (with certain exceptions).

Northern Ireland qualified for the World Cup finals in 1958 (reaching the
quarter-finals), 1982 and 1986. The Republic qualified for the World Cup in
1990 (reaching the quarter-finals), 1994, 2002 and the European Championships
in 1988. The IFA still retains all-Ireland cups and trophies at its Belfast HQ.

The Irish rugby team includes players from north and south, and the Irish Rugby
Football Union governs the sport on both sides of the border. Consequently in
international rugby, the Ireland team represents the whole island. The Irish
rugby team have played in every Rugby World Cup, making the quarter-finals at
four of them. Ireland also hosted games during the 1991 Rugby World Cup and the
1999 Rugby World Cup (including a quarter-final). There are also four
professional provincial sides that contest the Magners League and European
Heineken Cup. Irish rugby has become increasingly competitive at both the
international and provincial levels since the sport went professional in 1994.
During that time, Ulster (1999) and Munster (2006) have both won the European
Cup.

As with rugby and Gaelic games, cricket, golf, tennis, rowing, hockey and most
other sports are organised on an all-island basis.

Greyhound racing and horse racing are both popular in Ireland: greyhound
stadiums are well attended and there are frequent horse race meetings. The
Republic is noted for the breeding and training of race horses and is also a
large exporter of racing dogs. The horse racing sector is largely concentrated
in the central east of the Republic.

Boxing is also an all-island sport governed by the Irish Amateur Boxing
Association. In 1992 Michael Carruth won a gold medal for boxing in the Olympic
Games in Barcelona.

Irish athletics has seen some development in recent times, with Sonia O'
Sullivan winning Gold at the World Championships in 1995 in the 5,000 metres
and Silver in the 2000 Olympics in Sydney at the same distance. Gillian
O'Sullivan winning silver in the 20k walk at the World Championship's in 2003
and sprint hurdler Derval O'Rourke taking gold at the World Indoor
Championships in Moscow in 2006.

Golf is a popular sport in Ireland and golf tourism is a major industry. The
2006 Ryder Cup was held at The K Club in County Kildare.^[52] Padraig
Harrington became the first Irishman since Fred Daly in 1947 to win the British
Open at Carnoustie in July 2007.^[53]

In 2007, the Irish cricket team was among the associate nations which qualified
for the 2007 Cricket World Cup. The Irish team defeated Pakistan and finished
second in its pool, earning a place in the Super 8 section of the competition.

The west coast of Ireland, Lahinch and Donegal Bay in particular, have popular
surfing beaches; being fully exposed to the fury of the Atlantic Ocean. Surfing
in Ireland attracts surfers aiming to catch Europe's largest waves. Donegal Bay
is shaped like a funnel and catches West/South-West Atlantic winds, creating
good surf - especially in winter. In recent years, Bundoran has hosted European
championship surfing. The south-west of Ireland, such as the Dingle Peninsula
and Lahinch also have surf beaches.

Scuba diving is increasingly popular in Ireland with clear waters and large
populations of sea life, particularly along the western seaboard. There are
also many shipwrecks along the coast of Ireland, with some of the best wreck
dives being in Malin Head and off the County Cork coast.

With thousands of lakes, over 14,000 kilometres (8,700 mi) of fish bearing
rivers, and over 3,700 kilometres (2,300 mi) of coastline, Ireland is a popular
angling destination. The temperate Irish climate is suited to sport angling.
While salmon and trout fishing remain popular with anglers, salmon fishing in
particular received a boost in 2006 with the closing of the salmon driftnet
fishery. Coarse fishing continues to increase its profile. Sea angling is
developed with many beaches mapped and signposted, and in recent times the
range of sea angling species has increased.^[54]

    See also: List of Irish sports people

[edit] Places of interest

Some interesting places to visit on the island of Ireland include the
following:

Blarney Castle
●
Blarney Castle
Giant's Causeway
●
Giant's Causeway
Killarney National Park
●
Killarney National Park

  • The Aran Islands, Co. Galway
  • Blarney Castle, Co. Cork
  • Bunratty Castle, Co. Clare
  • The Burren, Co. Clare
  • Cahir Castle near Cahir, Co Tipperary
  • Carrickfergus Castle, Co. Antrim
  • Clonmacnoise Co. Offaly
  • Croagh Patrick, Co. Mayo
  • Cliffs of Moher, Co. Clare
  • Walled City of Derry
  • Dingle Peninsula, Co. Kerry
  • Galway City
  • The Giant's Causeway, Co. Antrim
  • Glendalough, Co. Wicklow
  • The Glens of Antrim, Co. Antrim
  • Hill of Tara, Co. Meath
  • Killarney National Park, Co. Kerry
  • Kilkenny Castle, Co. Kilkenny
  • King John's Castle (Limerick)
  • Knock Shrine, Co. Mayo
  • Kylemore Abbey, Co. Galway
  • The Mourne Mountains, Co. Down
  • Newgrange, Co. Meath
  • The Rock of Cashel, Co. Tipperary
  • Skellig Michael, Co. Kerry
  • Trim Castle, Co. Meath
  • Trinity College, Dublin, Co. Dublin. Houses the Book of Kells
  • The Wicklow Way, Co. Wicklow

[edit] Modern architecture

The Dublin Spire
●
The Dublin Spire

    Main article: Architecture of Ireland

In the 20th century, Irish architecture followed the international trend
towards modern, sleek and often radical building styles, particularly after
independence in the first half of the century. New building materials and old
were utilised in new ways to maximise style, space, light and energy
efficiency. 1928 saw the construction of Ireland's first all concrete Art Deco
church in Turners Cross, Cork.^[55] The building was designed by Chicago
architect Barry Byrne ^[56] and met with a cool reception among those more
accustomed to traditional designs.

In 1953, one of Ireland's most radical buildings, Bus Éireann's main Dublin
terminal building, better known as Busáras was completed. It was built despite
huge public opposition and excessive costs of over £1 million.^[57] Michael
Scott, its architect is now considered one of the most important architects of
the twentieth century in Ireland.^[58]

A significant change in Ireland's architecture has taken place over the last
few years, with a major shift towards the European continental ethos of
architecture and urbanity. There are currently four buildings in planning that
would eclipse the country's current tallest building record - currently held by
Cork County Hall in Cork. These projects include the Elysian Building in Cork
and the U2 Building, Players Mill and The Tall Building in Dublin. One of the
most symbolic structures of modern Irish architecture is the Spire of Dublin.
Completed in January 2003, the structure was nominated in 2004 for the
prestigious Stirling Prize.

[edit] Demographics

    Main article: Demographics of Ireland

The population of Ireland and Europe relative to population density showing the
disastrous consequence of the 1845—49 potato famine.
●
The population of Ireland and Europe relative to population density showing the
disastrous consequence of the 1845—49 potato famine.

Ireland has been inhabited for at least 9,000 years, although little is known
about the paleolithic and neolithic inhabitants of the island (other than by
inference from genetic research in 2004 that challenges the idea of migration
from central Europe and proposes a flow along the Atlantic coast from Spain).^
[59] ^[60] Early historical and genealogical records note the existence of
dozens of different peoples that may or may not be "mythological" (Cruithne,
Attacotti, Conmaicne, Eóganachta, Érainn, Soghain, to name but a few).

Population density map of Ireland showing the heavily weighted eastern
sea-board and the northern province of Ulster. Prior to the famine, the
provinces of Connacht, Munster and Leinster were more or less evenly populated.
Ulster was far less densely populated than the other three.
●
Population density map of Ireland showing the heavily weighted eastern
sea-board and the northern province of Ulster. Prior to the famine, the
provinces of Connacht, Munster and Leinster were more or less evenly populated.
Ulster was far less densely populated than the other three.

During the past 1,000 years or so, Vikings, Normans, Scots and English have all
added to the indigenous gene pool.

Ireland's largest religious group is the Roman Catholic Church (over 73% for
the entire island, and about 86.8%^[61] for the Republic), and most of the rest
of the population adhere to one of the various Protestant denominations. The
largest is the Anglican Church of Ireland. The Irish Muslim community is
growing, mostly through increased immigration (see Islam in Ireland). The
island also has a small Jewish community (see History of the Jews in Ireland),
although this has declined somewhat in recent years. Over 4% of the republic's
population describe themselves as of no religion^[61].

Ireland has for centuries been a place of emigration, particularly to England,
Scotland, the United States, Canada, and Australia, see Irish diaspora. With
growing prosperity, Ireland has become a place of immigration instead. Since
joining the EU in 2004, Polish people have been the largest source of
immigrants (over 180,000) from Central Europe, followed by other immigrants
from Lithuania, the Czech Republic and Latvia.

Ireland's high standard of living, high wage economy and EU membership attract
many migrants from the newest of the European Union countries: Ireland has had
a significant number of Romanian immigrants since the 1990s. In recent years,
mainland Chinese have been migrating to Ireland in significant numbers.
Nigerians, along with people from other African countries have accounted for a
large proportion of the non-European Union migrants to Ireland.

After Dublin (1,661,185 in Greater Dublin), Ireland's largest cities are
Belfast (579,276 in Greater Belfast), Cork (380,000 in Greater Cork), Derry
(94,329 in Derry Urban Area), Limerick (93,321 incl. suburbs Limerick urban
area), Galway (71,983), Lisburn (71,465), Waterford (49,240 including suburbs),
Newry (27,433), Kilkenny (23,967 incl. suburbs) and Armagh (14,590).

Ireland is bilingual but predominantly English-speaking, with Irish, the first
official language, the second most commonly spoken language.^[62]

[edit] Transport

    Main article: Transport in Ireland

[edit] Air

Aer Lingus Airbus A320 jet
●
Aer Lingus Airbus A320 jet

There are five main international airports in Ireland: Dublin Airport, Belfast
International Airport (Aldergrove), Cork Airport, Shannon Airport and Ireland
West Airport (Knock) . Dublin Airport is the busiest airport in Ireland,
carrying over 22 million passengers per year; it is now under construction to
build a new terminal and runway, costing over €2 billion. All provide services
to Great Britain and continental Europe, while Belfast International, Dublin,
Shannon and Ireland West (Knock) also offer a range of transatlantic services.
Shannon was once an important stopover on the trans-Atlantic route for
refuelling operations and, with Dublin, is still one of the Ireland's two
designated transatlantic gateway airports.

There are several smaller regional airports: George Best Belfast City Airport,
City of Derry Airport (Eglinton), Galway Airport, Kerry Airport (Farranfore), (
Knock), Sligo Airport (Strandhill), Waterford Airport, and Donegal Airport
(Carrickfinn). Scheduled services from these regional points are mostly limited
to the rest of Ireland and Great Britain.

Airlines in Ireland include: Aer Lingus (the national airline of Ireland),
Ryanair (Europe's largest low cost airline), Aer Arann and CityJet.

[edit] Rail

Railway routes, with major towns/station, mountains, ports and airports.
●
Railway routes, with major towns/station, mountains, ports and airports.

    Main articles: History of rail transport in Ireland and Rail transport in
    Ireland

The rail network in Ireland was developed by various private companies, some of
which received (British) Government funding in the late 19th century. The
network reached its greatest extent by 1920. The broad gauge of 1,600 mm (5 ft
3 in) was eventually settled upon throughout the island, although there were
also hundreds of kilometres of 914 mm (3 ft) narrow gauge railways.

Long distance passenger trains in the Republic are managed by Iarnród Éireann
(Irish Rail) and connect most major towns and cities across the country.

In Dublin, two local rail networks provide transportation in the city and its
immediate vicinity. The Dublin Area Rapid Transit (DART) links the city centre
with coastal suburbs, while a new light rail system named Luas, opened in 2004,
transports passengers to the central and western suburbs. Several more Luas
lines are planned as well as an eventual upgrade to metro. The DART is run by
Iarnród Éireann while the Luas is being run by Veolia under franchise from the
Railway Procurement Agency (R.P.A.).

Under the Irish government's Transport 21 plan, reopening the Navan-Clonsilla
rail link, the Cork-Midleton rail link and the Western Rail Corridor are
amongst plans for Ireland's railways.

In Northern Ireland, all rail services are provided by Northern Ireland
Railways (N.I.R.), part of Translink. Services in Northern Ireland are sparse
in comparison to the rest of Ireland or Britain. A large railway network was
severely curtailed in the 1950s and 1960s (in particular by the Ulster
Transport Authority). The current situation includes suburban services to Larne
, Newry and Bangor, as well as services to Derry. There is also a branch from
Coleraine to Portrush. Waterside Station in Derry is the main railway station
for County Londonderry as well as County Donegal in Ireland.

Ireland also has one of the largest dedicated freight railways in Europe,
operated by Bord na Móna. This company has narrow gauge railways totalling
1,930 kilometres (1,200 miles).

[edit] Roads

Dublin Port Tunnel under construction.
●
Dublin Port Tunnel under construction.

    Main article: Roads in Ireland

Motorists must drive on the left in Ireland, as in Great Britain, Australia,
New Zealand, India, Hong Kong, Japan, and a number of other countries. Tourists
driving on the wrong side of the road cause serious accidents every year.^[63]
The island of Ireland has an extensive road network, with a (developing)
motorway network fanning out from Belfast and Dublin. Historically, land owners
developed most roads and later Turnpike Trusts collected tolls so that as early
as 1800 Ireland had a 16,100 km (10,000 mi) road network.^[64]

The year 1815 marked the inauguration of the first horsecar service from
Clonmel to Thurles and Limerick run by Charles Bianconi. Now, the main bus
companies are Bus Éireann in the Republic and Ulsterbus, a division of
Translink, in Northern Ireland, both of which offer extensive passenger service
in all parts of the island. Dublin Bus specifically serves the greater Dublin
area, and a further division of Translink called Metro, operates services
within the greater Belfast area. Translink also operate Ulsterbus Foyle in the
Derry Urban Area.

All speed limit signs in Ireland changed to the metric system in 2005. Some
direction signs still show distance in miles^[65]. Ireland nowadays is almost
entirely metric. Use of imperial measurements are usually limited to pints of
beer in pubs, and informal measurement of human height (feet and inches) and
weight (usually stones, but pounds and ounces for infants). However, younger
generations tend to use metric units more so than the older generations.

[edit] Energy network

For much of their existence electricity networks in Ireland and Northern
Ireland were entirely separate. Both networks were designed and constructed
independently, but are now connected with three interlinks and also connected
by Northern Ireland Electricity (NIE) through Great Britain to mainland Europe.
The Electricity Supply Board (ESB) in the Republic drove a rural
electrification programme in the 1940s until the 1970s.

Ringsend power station, Dublin.
●
Ringsend power station, Dublin.

Ireland, north and south has faced difficulties in providing continuous power
at peak load. The situation in Northern Ireland is complicated by the issue of
private companies not supplying NIE with enough power, while in Ireland, the
ESB has failed to modernise its power stations. In the latter case,
availability of power plants has averaged 66% recently, one of the worst such
figures in Western Europe.

The natural gas network is also now all-island, with an interconnector from
Antrim to Scotland, and a further two interconnectors from Dublin to Scotland.
Most of Ireland's gas now comes through the interconnectors with a decreasing
supply from the Kinsale field. The Corrib Gas Field off the coast of County
Mayo has yet to come online, and is facing some localised opposition over the
controversial decision to refine the gas onshore.

There have been recent efforts in Ireland to use renewable energy such as wind
energy with large wind farms being constructed in coastal counties such as
Donegal, Mayo and Antrim. What will be the world's largest offshore wind farm
is currently being developed at Arklow Bank off the coast of Wicklow. It is
predicted to generate 10% of Ireland's energy needs when it is complete. These
constructions have in some cases been delayed by opposition from locals, most
recently on Achill Island, some of whom consider the wind turbines to be
unsightly. Another issue in the Republic of Ireland is the failure of the aging
network to cope with the varying availability of power from such installations.
The ESB's Turlough Hill is the only energy storage mechanism in Ireland.^[66]

[edit] Economy

    Main articles: Economy of the Republic of Ireland and Economy of Northern
    Ireland

In the 1920s and early 1930s, Ireland pursued a low-tax, low-spending,
non-interventionist approach under the government of W. T. Cosgrave and Cumann
na nGaedhael, focused mainly on agriculture, livestock farming being of primary
importance. The only notable expense the government went to during this time
was for the rural electrification scheme, which saw £5,000,000 being spent
constructing the Ardnacrusha hydroelectric power station on the river Shannon
(also known as the Shannon Scheme). During this period, 97% of trade was done
with Britain. This government favoured free-trade. However many saw this as
inadequate after the Wall Street Crash of 1929.

Construction plays an important role in the Irish economy
●
Construction plays an important role in the Irish economy

In 1932, Eamonn De Valera's Fianna Fáil party defeated Cosgrave's party with a
solid majority. De Valera's policy was of economic nationalism, a belief in
self-sufficiency, and attempted industrialization. Fianna Fáil abandoned free
trade and put up protective tariffs on almost all manufactured products. In
June, 1932 De Valera withheld land annuities, which dated back to the land acts
of the 18th and early 19th century, which were hitherto paid to the British
Government. Britain responded by placing tariffs on Irish exports of livestock
and by-products. In turn De Valera imposed duties on British coal. This
developed into an 'economic war' known as the Anglo-Irish Trade War. The
economic war resulted in widespread hardship for Irish farming, which was the
backbone of the economy, and which relied on exports to English cities for a
market. The tariffs resulted in price increases for many essential manufactured
goods, and an increase in the cost of living. High unemployment in richer
English speaking countries made emigration from Ireland less of an option,
decreasing wages. At this time many Irish industries were established, based of
low wages, and protectionist barriers. With the British anticipating war, and
the Irish in a dire financial situation, the trade war ended in 1938, with the
British agreeing to discontinue land annuity payments from Irish farmers.
Fianna Fáil established many semi-state organizations for the purposes of
utilizing national resources, and marshalling larger scale industries. At this
time the Irish economy enjoyed a stable period.

Fianna Fáil remained in power until 1948, when the first coalition government
ousted them. To the present day, the two largest parties, Fianna Fáil and Fine
Gael, have dominated the scene, Fine Gael traditionally being seen as less
interventionist in economic matters. Fianna Fáil have become less
interventionist and more market driven in the early 1990s, especially when in
alliance with the small pro-business party, the Progressive Democrats.

Northern Ireland experienced a boom during World War II, as a result of demand
for its principal industries, shipbuilding and linen making, and got a lot of
support from the British government thereafter. In comparison, Ireland did not
experience a WWII boom and its situation declined relative to Northern Ireland.
In the 1950s there was a dramatic decrease in the population of working age, as
workers picked up better paid jobs in Britain and North America. This was a
period of great concern, with considerable social heamorrhaging taking place in
rural Ireland in particular. In the early 1960s, the new Fianna Fáil leader
Seán Lemass abandoned its previous protectionist policies, and embarked on a
programme of economic reform. Serious efforts were made to attract inward
investment from the United States in particular, and to a lesser extent West
Germany, and Japan. Purpose built industrial estates were developed in most
large towns. Rural Electrification, the division of large estates, and
agricultural scientific education resulted in dramatic increases in
agricultural output in the 1960s. In 1972, second level education was made free
and compulsory. Ireland applied to join the European Economic Community,
gaining entry in 1973 along with Britain.

From 1973 to 1983, the island of Ireland was hit by two oil crises, a series of
bank strikes that paralysed business activity for 18 months, poor industrial
relations, public pay rises, and runaway inflation. However, poor management of
the state finances was being addressed with repeated increases in taxation of
all beneficial activity, until employment became less attractive than welfare.
At the same time it was found that Irish industry was completely unprepared for
competition that arose as a result of free trade with continental Europe.
Ireland's heavy industries, located primarily in Cork, almost disappeared
between 1982 and 1984. Agriculture, the only sector of the economy which was
competitive at this stage, was constrained by production quotas, and prevented
from taking up the slack in the economy. At the same time Ireland was producing
its first generation where university education was widely attained. There was
mass unemployment, with many people with tertiary education working minimum
wage jobs or being out of work. Emigration returned to 50,000 per year. From
1982 to 1986 the national debt had doubled, mostly due to stabilization
policies like welfare, gigantic subsidies to semistate organizations and public
utilities, and an effort to reduce inflation and stabilise the currency.

This situation changed dramatically in the mid 1990s as the result of a second,
more prodigious, economic boom, known as the "Celtic Tiger" (as in "tiger
economy"). This was led by a surge in inward investment in high end industries
in services, and lower taxation levels. From 2002, this was augmented by low
interest rates set by the European Central Bank which encourage private sector
consumption. In July 2006, a survey undertaken by Bank of Ireland Private
Banking showed that, of the top 8 leading OECD nations, the Republic of Ireland
was ranked the second wealthiest per capita country in the world, showing an
average wealth per head of nearly €150,000 (~ $190,000).^[67] This is behind
Japan, and ahead of other countries such as the United Kingdom, United States,
Italy, France, Germany and Spain.

Education in Ireland is free at all levels, including college (university).

In 2005, Ireland was ranked the best place to live in the world, according to a
"quality of life" assessment by Economist magazine. The country's combination
of increasing wealth and traditional values gives it the conditions most likely
to make its people happy, the survey found. These conditions include health,
freedom, unemployment, family life, climate, political stability and security,
gender equality and family and community life. The Economist said: "Ireland
wins because it successfully combines the most desirable elements of the new,
such as low unemployment and political liberties, with the preservation of
certain cosy elements of the old, such as stable family and community life."

The rosy reports and GDP figures mask several underlying imbalances. The
construction sector, which is inherently cyclical in nature, now accounts for a
significant component of Ireland's GDP. This was being driven by low
interest-rates and the fact that Ireland is one of the few countries in the
OECD not to have residential housing or water rates.^[citation needed] A recent
downturn in residential property market sentiment has highlighted the
over-exposure of the Irish economy to construction, which now presents a threat
to economic growth.^[68]^[69] Several successive years of unbalanced economic
growth have also led to huge inequality between the strata of Irish society
(see Economy of the Republic of Ireland - Recent developments), as well as
significant environmental degradation, including rapid loss of biodiversity and
erosion of natural and cultural heritage^[70] ^[71], and the highest per-capita
rise in greenhouse gas emissions in the European Union since the Kyoto Protocol
came into effect^[72] ^[73].

[edit] Gallery of images

       This section seems to be an image gallery.
       Please help by moving freely licensed images to Wikimedia Commons,
[40px] possibly creating a gallery of the same name if one does not already
       exist. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for further
       suggestions.

[120px-Inishmaan_] [90px-Blarne]          [80px-Clonm]       [90px-Cliffs]

The Aran Islands,  Blarney Castle, Co.    Clonmacnoise Co.   Cliffs of Moher,
Co. Galway         Cork                   Offaly             Co. Clare

[102px-Shipqua]    [120px-HalfPennyB]     [120px-Causeway-c] [120px-Mourne_mou]

Walled City of     The Ha'penny Bridge,   The Giant's        The Mourne
Derry              Dublin                 Causeway, Co.      Mountains, Co.
                                          Antrim             Down

[120px-270_Cashel] [96px-Skellig]         [120px-SlieveLeag] [120px-Trim_Castl]

The Rock of Cashel Christ's Saddle,       Slieve League      Trim Castle, Co.
, Co. Tipperary    Skellig Michael, Co.   cliffs, Co.Donegal Meath
                   Kerry


[edit] See also

● Ireland Portal

  • List of Ireland-related topics
  • List of topics related to Northern Ireland
  • List of Counties in Ireland
  • List of towns in the Republic of Ireland
  • Republic of Ireland
  • Northern Ireland
  • Kingdom of Ireland
  • The Ireland Funds
  • Irish people
  • Lordship of Ireland
  • Clonycavan Man

[edit] Notes

 1. ^ Great Britain being the largest and Iceland being the second largest.
 2. ^ See List of islands by area.
 3. ^ Central Statistics Office Ireland
 4. ^ Population of the Greater Dublin Area to reach 2 million by 2021, Central
    Statistics Office Ireland
 5. ^ BreakingNews.ie - 'Migration pushes population in the North up to 1.75
    million' Demography and Methodology Branch, NISRA - Excel file
 6. ^ "Background Information on Northern Ireland Society: Population and Vital
    Statistics" from CAIN Web Service. Combined population of Belfast,
    Castlereagh, Carrickfergus and Lisburn. Accessed 6 February 2007
 7. ^ Article 2, Republic of Ireland Act 1948, Government of Ireland
 8. ^ Indicates that the population for Ulster is the sum of the 2006 census
    results for counties of Ulster in Republic of Ireland and the 2006 Northern
    Ireland estimated population for Northern Ireland. Population for other
    provinces is all 2006 census results.
 9. ^ BBC News, "Call for all-Ireland soccer team", 19 January 2007
10. ^ BBC Sport, "All-Ireland warning from Delaney", 17 January 2008
11. ^ World Socialist Web Site, "Ireland: Fianna Fail and SDLP float unity pact
    ", 1 February 2003
12. ^ Northern Ireland Assembly minutes, December 2002
13. ^ Forfás report
14. ^ Agreement Reached in the Multi-party Negotiations - Northern Ireland
    Assembly
15. ^ http://www.allislandmarket.com/about/
16. ^ DUP minister expresses support for single gas market at Belfast Telegraph
17. ^ Highest Mountains in Ireland. Ordnance Survey Ireland. Retrieved on 2007-
    08-20.
18. ^ River Shannon - Shannon Development Website www.shannonregiontourism.ie
19. ^ Land and People www.irlgov.ie
20. ^ Website of Met Éireann - Temperature in Ireland www.met.ie
21. ^ Met Éireann (Irish National Meteorological Service) Historical rainfall
    statistics
22. ^ Website of Met Éireann - Rainfall in Ireland www.met.ie
23. ^ "Land cover and land use", Environmental Protection Agency', 2000.
    Accessed July 30, 2007
24. ^ National forestation statistics, Jan 2007 - Coillte Teoranta
25. ^ H. & J. Groves
26. ^ Guiry, M.D. and Dhonncha, E.N. 2001. The marine macroalgae of Ireland :
    biodiversity and distribution. in Marine Biodiversity in Ireland and
    Adjacent Waters. Proceedings of a Conference 26–27 April 2001. Ulster
    Museum publication no.8
27. ^ Minchin, D. 2001. Biodiversity and Marine Invaders.(Appendix) in Maine
    Biodiversity in Ireland and Adjacent Waters. Proceedings of a Conference 26
    - 27 April 2001. Ulster Museum publication no.8
28. ^ ^a ^b CAP reform - a long-term perspective for sustainable agriculture,
    European Commission, <http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/capreform/
    index_en.htm>. Retrieved on 30 July 2007
29. ^ "Land cover and land use", Environmental Protection Agency', 2000.
    Accessed July 30, 2007
30. ^ Roche, Dick (2006-11-08), National Parks, vol. 185, Seanad Éireann, <
    http://historical-debates.oireachtas.ie/S/0185/S.0185.200611080008.html>.
    Retrieved on 30 July 2007 Seanad Debate involving Former Minister for
    Environment Heritage and Local Government
31. ^ The Neolithic, or New Stone Age: Farming
32. ^ Breakingnews.ie - Report on gene origins
33. ^ Prospect-magazine.co.uk - Genetic heritage
34. ^ Royal Society - Genes
35. ^ Hibernia unrv.com
36. ^ http://www.bartleby.com/65/sc/Scotia.html The Columbia Encyclopedia,
    Sixth Edition. 2001-05
37. ^ The Geography of Ptolemy www.Roman-Britain.org
38. ^ BBC The curse of Cromwell
39. ^ Laws in Ireland for the Suppression of Popery at University of Minnesota
    Law School
40. ^ Alan J. Ward, The Irish Constitutional Tradition p.28.
41. ^ Irish-American Heritage Month (March) and St. Patrick's Day (March 17)
    2007, US government census
42. ^ Ireland Learns to Adapt to a Population Growth Spurt New York Times
43. ^ BBC History of Northern Ireland
44. ^ Ireland considering immigration deal with U.S., Reuters, October 25, 2006
45. ^ Professor John H. Whyte paper on discrimination in Northern Ireland
46. ^ Religion, Identity & Politics – Northern Ireland Conflict & Resolution,
    1969-2005 - NYU department of history
47. ^ http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/events/peace/decommission/iicd190106.pdf
48. ^ The James Joyce Centre - Bloomsday in Dublin www.jamesjoyce.ie
49. ^ Ireland in shock Eurovision exit. BBC Online (2005-05-19). Retrieved on
    2008-01-10.
50. ^ Irish Government Website Culture and Sport Information http://
    www.irlgov.ie
51. ^ Croke Park Stadium. Retrieved on 2007-10-03.
52. ^ 2006 Ryder Cup Official Site http://www.pga.com
53. ^ British Open Golf Official Site - News
54. ^ Fishing in Ireland- Central Fisheries Board www.cfb.ie
55. ^ http://turnerscross.com/
56. ^ http://turnerscross.com/church/barry_byrne
57. ^ Busáras at archiseek.com
58. ^ http://ireland.archiseek.com/architects_ireland/michael_scott/index.html
59. ^ http://www.breakingnews.ie/2004/09/09/story165780.html
60. ^ http://www.prospect-magazine.co.uk/article_details.php?id=7817
61. ^ ^a ^b Census 2006 Volume 13 Religion (pdf). Central Statistics Office.
    Retrieved on 2008-01-29.
62. ^ CSO.ie - Census 2006 (37.6% of workforce (>15 years) classified as "Irish
    speakers")
63. ^ U.S. Department of State, Consular Information Sheet Ireland, TRAFFIC
    SAFETY AND ROAD CONDITIONS travel.state.gov
64. ^ THE HISTORY OF TRANSPORT IN IRELAND PART 1 www.cie.ie
65. ^ Lost: Dublin signpost with distances in miles. at ErasmusPC.com
66. ^ Options For Future Renewable Energy Policy, Targets And Programmes Issued
    By Department Of Communications, Marine And Natural Resources
    www.hibernianwindpower.ie (27 February 2004)
67. ^ http://www.rte.ie/news/2006/0710/economy.html
68. ^ Economic Survey of Ireland 2006: Keeping public finances on track, OECD,
    2006, <http://www.oecd.org/document/50/
    0,3343,en_33873108_33873500_36173106_1_1_1_1,00.html>. Retrieved on 30 July
    2007
69. ^ House slowdown sharper than expected, RTÉ, 2007-08-03, <http://www.rte.ie
    /business/2007/0803/economy1.html>. Retrieved on 6 August 2007
70. ^ http://www.noticenature.ie
71. ^ http://www.international.icomos.org/risk/irela_2000.htm
72. ^ http://earthtrends.wri.org/pdf_library/country_profiles/cli_cou_372.pdf
73. ^ http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/breaking-news/ireland/
    article3298789.ece

[edit] References

  • Fairley, J.S. 1975. An Irish Beast Book. A Natural History of Ireland's
    Furred Wildlife. Blackstaff Press, Belfast. ISBN 85640 090 4
  • Hardy, F.G. & Guiry, M.D. 2006. A Check-list and Atlas of the Seaweeds of
    Britain and Ireland. Revised Edition pp. x + 435. London: British
    Phycological Society. Available from Koeltz Books, Germany. ISBN
    3-906166-35-X
  • Knowles, M.C. 1929. The Lichens of Ireland. Proceedings of the Royal Irish
    Academy. Vol. 38 :179 - 434.
  • Morton, O. 1994. Marine Algae of Northern Ireland. Ulster Museum. ISBN 0
    900761 28 8
  • Morton, O. 2003. The marine algae macroalgae of County Donegal, Ireland.
    Bull. Ir. biogeog. Soc. 27:3 - 164.
  • Seaward, M.R.D. 1984. Census Catalogue of Irish Lichens. Glasra 8: 1 - 32.

  • Cullinane, J.P. 1973. Phycology of the south coast of Ireland. University
    College Cork.

  • Herm, Gerhard (2002), The Celts, Ireland: St. Martin's Press, ISBN
    0312313438

  • O'Rahilly, T. F. (1947), Early Irish History and Mythology, US: Medieval
    Academy of America

[edit] Further reading

[edit] Wildlife

  • Nunn, J.D. (ed.) 2002. Marine Biodiversity in Ireland and Adjacent Waters.
    Proceedings of a Conference 26 - 27 April 2001. Ulster Museum publication
    no. 8.
  • Hackney, P. Ed. 1992. Stewart and Corry's Flora of the North-east of
    Ireland. Institute of Irish Studies, The Queen's University, Belfast. ISBN
    0 85 389 4469.
  • Haigh, A. and Lawton, C. 2007. Wild mammals of an Irish urban forest. Ir
    Nat. J. 28: 395 - 403.
  • Chara curta in Ireland ^[74]

[edit] External links

[50px-C]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
Ireland

  • Wikitravel has Republic of Ireland guide to the Republic of Ireland
  • Wikitravel has Northern Ireland guide to Northern Ireland
  • History of Ireland: Primary Documents
  • Encyclopaedia Britannica's Ireland country page
  • Ireland Facts Photo and information gallery from AOL Research & Learn

                                   v • d • e
                              Counties of Ireland
Connacht Galway (Galway City) · Leitrim · Mayo · Roscommon · Sligo

         Clare · Cork (Cork City) · Kerry · Limerick (Limerick City) ·
Munster  Tipperary (North Tipperary • South Tipperary) · Waterford (Waterford
         City)

         Carlow · Dublin (Dublin City • Dun Laoghaire-Rathdown • Fingal • South
Leinster Dublin) · Kildare · Kilkenny · Laois · Longford · Louth · Meath ·
         Offaly · Westmeath · Wexford · Wicklow

         Cavan · Donegal · Monaghan · Antrim · Armagh · Down · Fermanagh ·
 Ulster  Londonderry · Tyrone

Italics denote non-administrative counties  ·   (Parentheses) denote eponymous
cities or non-traditional counties

                                   v • d • e
                       Celtic nations and their culture
          Brittany (Breizh) · Cornwall (Kernow) · Wales (Cymru) ·
 Nations  Ireland (Éire) · Isle of Man (Mannin) · Scotland (Alba)

          Brythonic: Breton · Cornish · Welsh
Languages Goidelic: Irish · Manx · Scottish Gaelic (Galloway) · Shelta

          Brittany · Cornwall · Ireland · Isle of Man · Scotland ·
 Culture  Wales
                                                                        Celtic
          Brittany · Cornwall · Ireland · Isle of Man · Scotland ·      nations
  Music   Wales  

          Cammag · Cornish hurling · Cornish wrestling · Curling ·
  Sport   Gaelic football · Gaelic handball · Golf · Gouren · Rounders
           · Highland games · Hurling · Road bowls · Shinty

 Peoples  Breton · Cornish · Irish · Irish Traveller · Manx · Scottish
           · Ulster-Scots · Welsh

                                   v • d • e
                          British Islands and Ireland
Terminology · Naming dispute · Islands of the North Atlantic (IONA)
           Sovereign   Ireland · United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
           states and  Ireland (UK, consisting of England · Northern Ireland ·
          constituent  Scotland · Wales)
           countries
            British
Politics     Crown     Guernsey · Jersey · Isle of Man
          dependencies
           Political   British-Irish Council · British-Irish
          cooperation  Inter-Parliamentary Body · Common Travel Area · North/
                       South Ministerial Council

           Island   Channel Islands · Islands of the Clyde · Great Britain ·
           groups   Hebrides · Ireland · Isle of Man · Isles of Scilly ·
                    Northern Isles (Orkney · Shetland)
Geography Lists of  Ireland · Isle of Man · United Kingdom (England · Scotland 
           islands  · Wales)
             of

            Current    Ireland · United Kingdom (England · Northern Ireland ·
           states and  Scotland · Wales)
          dependencies Guernsey · Jersey · Isle of Man
 History               Kingdom of England · Kingdom of Scotland · Kingdom of
             Former    Ireland · Principality of Wales · Kingdom of Great
             states    Britain · United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland ·
                       Irish Free State

           Modern   Auregnais · BSL · Cornish · English · French · Guernésiais 
          languages · Irish · ISL · Jèrriais · Manx · NISL · Scots (Ulster) ·
 Society            Scottish Gaelic · Sercquais · Welsh
           Peoples  British · Celts · Cornish · English · Irish · Irish
                    Traveller · Manx · Scottish · Ulster-Scots · Welsh

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ireland"
Categories: Divided regions | Ireland
Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since December 2007

Views

  • Article
  • Discussion
  • Edit this page
  • History

Personal tools

  • Log in / create account

 

Navigation

  • Main Page
  • Contents
  • Featured content
  • Current events
  • Random article

Interaction

  • About Wikipedia
  • Community portal
  • Recent changes
  • Contact Wikipedia
  • Donate to Wikipedia
  • Help

Search

[                    ] [Go]  [Search]
Toolbox

  • What links here
  • Related changes
  • Upload file
  • Special pages
  • Printable version
  • Permanent link
  • Cite this page

Languages

  • Afrikaans
  • አማርኛ
  • Anglo Saxon
  • ܐܪܡܝܐ
  • Asturianu
  • Bân-lâm-gú
  • Bosanski
  • Brezhoneg
  • Български
  • Català
  • Česky
  • Cymraeg
  • Dansk
  • Deutsch
  • ཇོང་ཁ
  • Eesti
  • Ελληνικά
  • Español
  • Esperanto
  • Euskara
  • فارسی
  • Føroyskt
  • Français
  • Gaeilge
  • Gaelg
  • Gàidhlig
  • Galego
  • Hak-kâ-fa
  • 한국어
  • Hrvatski
  • Bahasa Indonesia
  • Interlingua
  • Íslenska
  • Italiano
  • עברית
  • Kernewek
  • Kurdî / كوردی
  • Lietuvių
  • Magyar
  • മലയാളം
  • Nederlands
  • 日本語
  • ‪Norsk (bokmål)‬
  • ‪Norsk (nynorsk)‬
  • Nouormand
  • Occitan
  • Piemontèis
  • Polski
  • Português
  • Română
  • Romani
  • Rumantsch
  • Runa Simi
  • Русский
  • Gagana Samoa
  • Scots
  • Simple English
  • Slovenščina
  • Српски / Srpski
  • Suomi
  • Svenska
  • Tagalog
  • தமிழ்
  • ไทย
  • Tiếng Việt
  • Tok Pisin
  • Türkçe
  • Українська
  • ייִדיש
  • 中文

Powered by MediaWiki
Wikimedia Foundation

  • This page was last modified on 6 March 2008, at 16:22.
  • All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License
    . (See Copyrights for details.)
    Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a
    U.S. registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.
  • Privacy policy
  • About Wikipedia
  • Disclaimers

